SPEAKER: S1
The example that I would like to work with, and that I am particularly fond of is that of OpenAI's GPT two. So GPT stands for Generative Pre-trained Transformer, and this is the second iteration of the GPT series by OpenAI. When you are talking to ChatGPT today, the model that is underlying all of the magic of that interaction is GPT four. So the fourth iteration of that series, now, GPT two, was published in 2019 by OpenAI in this paper that I have right here. And the reason I like GPT two is that it is the first time that a recognizably modern stack came together. So, um, all of the pieces of GPT two are recognizable today by modern standards, is just everything has gotten bigger. Now, I'm not going to be able to go into the full details of this paper, of course, because it is a technical publication. But some of the details that I would like to highlight are as follows. GPT two was a transformer neural network, just like you were, just like the neural networks you would work with today. It was it had 1.6 billion parameters. Right. So these are the parameters that we looked at here. It would have 1.6 billion of them. Today, modern transformers would have a lot closer to a trillion or several hundred billion. Probably the maximum context length here was 1024 tokens. So it is when we are sampling chunks of windows of tokens from the data set, we're never taking more than 1024 tokens. And so when you are trying to predict the next token in a sequence, you will never have more than 1024 tokens, kind of in your context in order to make that prediction. Now, this is also tiny by modern standards. Today, the token, the context lengths would be a lot closer to, um, a couple hundred thousand or maybe even a million. And so you have a lot more context, a lot more tokens in the history, and you can make a lot better prediction about the next token in the sequence in that way. And finally, GPT two was trained on approximately 100 billion tokens. And this is also fairly small by modern standards. As I mentioned, the fine web data set that we looked at here. The final data set has 15 trillion tokens. So 100 billion is is quite small. Now I actually tried to reproduce GPT two for fun as part of this project called LMC. So you can see my writeup of doing that in this post on GitHub under the LMC repository. So in particular, the cost of training GPT 2 in 2019, what was estimated to be approximately $40,000. But today you can do significantly better than that. And in particular here I took about one day and about $600. But this wasn't even trying too hard. I think you could really bring this down to about $100 today. Now, why is it that the costs have come down so much? Well, number one, these data sets have gotten a lot better. And the way we filter them, extract them and prepare them has gotten a lot more refined. And so the data set is of just a lot higher quality. So that's one thing. But really the biggest difference is that our computers have gotten much faster in terms of the hardware. And we're going to look at that in a second. And also the software for running these models and really squeezing out all the all the speed from the hardware as it is possible. Uh, that software has also gotten much better, as everyone has focused on these models and trying to run them very, very quickly. Now, I'm not going to be able to go into the full detail of this GPT two reproduction. And this is a long technical post, but I would like to still give you an intuitive sense for what it looks like to actually train one of these models as a researcher. Like, what are you looking at and what does it look like? What does it feel like? So let me give you a sense of that a little bit. Okay. So this is what it looks like. Let me slide this over. So what I'm doing here is I'm training GPT two model right now. And what's happening here is that every single line here like this one is one update to the model. So remember how here we are basically making the prediction better for every one of these tokens. And we are updating these weights or parameters of the neural net. So here every single line is one update to the neural network, where we change its parameters by a little bit so that it is better at predicting the next token in sequence. In particular, every single line here is improving the prediction on 1 million tokens in the training set. So we've basically taken 1 million tokens out of this dataset, and we've tried to improve the prediction of that token as coming next in a sequence on all 1 million of them simultaneously. And at every single one of these steps we are making an update to the network for that. Now the number to watch closely is this number called loss. And the loss is a single number that is telling you how well your neural network is performing right now, and it is created so that low loss is good. So you'll see that the loss is decreasing as we make more updates to the neural net, which corresponds to making better predictions on the next token in a sequence. And so the loss is the number that you are watching as a neural network researcher. And you are kind of waiting. You're twiddling your thumbs, you're drinking coffee, and you're making sure that this looks good, so that with every update your loss is improving and the network is getting better at prediction. Now here you see that we are processing 1 million tokens per update. Each update takes about seven seconds roughly. And here we are going to process a total of 32,000 steps of optimization. So 32,000 steps with 1 million tokens each is about 33 billion tokens that we are going to process. And we're currently only about 420 step for 20 out of 32,000. So we are still only a bit more than 1% done, because I've only been running this for 10 or 15 minutes or something like that. Now every 20 steps I have configured this optimization to do inference. So what you're seeing here is the model is predicting the next token in the sequence. And so you sort of start it randomly and then you continue plugging in the tokens. So we're running this inference step. And this is the model sort of predicting the next token in a sequence. And every time you see something appear that's a new token. Um so let's just look at this and you can see that this is not yet very coherent. And keep in mind that this is only 1% of the way through training. And so the model is not yet very good at predicting the next token in the sequence. So what comes out is actually kind of a little bit of gibberish, right. But it still has a little bit of like local coherence. So since she is mine, it's a part of the information should discuss my father, great companions. Gordon showed me sitting over it and etc. so I know it doesn't look very good, but let's actually scroll up and see what it looked like when I started the optimization. So all the way here at step one. So after 20 steps of optimization you see that what we're getting here is looks completely random. And of course that's because the model has only had 20 updates to its parameters. And so it's giving you random text because it's a random network. And so you can see that at least in comparison to this, the model is starting to do much better. And indeed, if we waited the entire 32,000 steps, the model will have improved the point that it's actually generating fairly coherent English and the tokens stream correctly. And they they kind of make up English a lot better. Um, so this has to run for about a day or two more now. And so at this stage we just make sure that the loss is decreasing. Everything is looking good. Um, and we just have to wait. And now. Um, let me turn now to the story of the computation that's required, because, of course, I'm not running this optimization on my laptop. That would be way too expensive, because we have to run this neural network and we have to improve it. And we have we need all this data and so on. So you can't run this too well on your computer because the network is just too large. So all of this is running on the computer that is out there in the cloud. And I want to basically address the compute side of the story of training these models and what that looks like. So let's take a look. Okay. So the computer that I am running this optimization on is this eight x 100 node. So there are eight A100 in a single node or a single computer. Now I am renting this computer and it is somewhere in the cloud. I'm not sure where it is physically. Actually the place I like to rent from is called Lamda, but there are many other companies who provide this service, so when you scroll down you can see that they have some on demand pricing for, uh, sort of computers that have these. Uh, A100 which are GPUs. And I'm going to show you what they look like in a second. But on demand eight times Nvidia a100 GPU. This machine comes for $3 per GPU per hour, for example. So you can rent these and then you get a machine in the cloud and you can go in and you can train these models and these GPUs, they look like this. So this is one A100 GPU. This is kind of what it looks like. And you slot this into your computer. And GPUs are this a perfect fit for training neural networks because they are very computationally expensive. But they display a lot of parallelism in the computation. So you can have many independent workers kind of working all at the same time in solving the matrix multiplication. That's under the hood of training these neural networks. So this is just one of these H1 hundreds. But actually you would put them you would put multiple of them together so you could stack eight of them into a single node. And then you can stack multiple nodes into an entire data center or an entire system. So when we look at a data center. Can't spell. When we look at a data center, we start to see things that look like this. Right. So we have one GPU, goes to eight GPUs, goes to a single system, goes to many systems. And so these are the bigger data centers. And they of course would be much, much more expensive. Um, and what's happening is that all the big tech companies really desire these GPUs so they can train all these language models because they are so powerful. And that is fundamentally what has driven the stock price of Nvidia to be $3.4 trillion today, as an example, and why Nvidia has kind of exploded. So this is the gold rush. The gold rush is getting the GPUs, getting enough of them so they can all Collaborate to perform this optimization. And what are they all doing? They're all collaborating to predict the next token on a data set like the fine web data set. This is the computational workflow that that basically is extremely expensive. The more GPUs you have, the more tokens you can try to predict and improve on, and you're going to process this data set faster, and you can iterate faster and get a bigger network and train a bigger network and so on. So this is all those machines that are look like are, uh, are doing and this is why all of this is such a big deal. And for example, this is a article from like about a month ago or so. This is why it's a big deal. For example, Elon Musk is getting 100,000 GPUs in a single data center, and all of these GPUs are extremely expensive, are going to take a ton of power, and all of them are just trying to predict the next token in the sequence and improve the network by doing so and get probably a lot more coherent text than what we're seeing here a lot.